docs/fitur-penilaian/log-stream.md, before:

# Real-time Log Streaming (Socket)

This document describes the lightweight socket-based log streaming feature used for development and e2e testing.

## Overview

-   The project ships a small socket server at `scripts/socket-server.cjs` (dev-only) that listens on `SOCKET_PORT` (default 9150) and exposes `POST /emit-log` to emit a `log:new` event.
-   Clients can connect with a socket.io client and listen for `log:new` events. Events can target a room `logs:<workspaceId>` or broadcast to `logs:all`.

## Running locally

1. Install dependencies: `npm install`
2. Start socket server: `npm run dev:socket` (listens on `:9150` by default)
3. Emit a test log: `curl -X POST http://localhost:9150/emit-log -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"id":"t1","ts":1690000000000,"method":"GET","path":"/api/test","statusCode":200}'`

## Integration

-   Client wrapper: `services/socketClient.ts` provides a simple API: `connect(token?)`, `on(event, handler)`, `emit(event, payload)`, `join(room)`, `disconnect()`.
-   App wires `socketClient.on('log:new', ...)` to append logs to the UI if `FEATURES.LOG_VIEWER()` is enabled.

## Security & Scaling

-   If `SOCKET_AUTH_TOKEN` is set in the env, the server requires the same token on handshake (query param or `auth.token` for socket.io clients).
-   For multi-instance deployments, use a socket.io adapter such as `socket.io-redis` to broadcast events between instances.

## Tests

-   Unit test: `test/socketClient.test.ts` validates that a client receives `log:new` when `POST /emit-log` is called.
-   E2E: `test/e2e/socket-log-stream.spec.ts` verifies the browser UI shows a log emitted by the socket server.

Commit message:

feat: enhance socket server with CORS configuration, rate limiting, and payload validation; add tests for payload size and invalid JSON handling

docs/fitur-penilaian/log-stream.md, after:

# Real-time Log Streaming (Socket)

This document describes the lightweight socket-based log streaming feature used for development and e2e testing.

## Overview

-   The project ships a small socket server at `scripts/socket-server.cjs` (dev-only) that listens on `SOCKET_PORT` (default 9150) and exposes `POST /emit-log` to emit a `log:new` event.
-   Clients can connect with a socket.io client and listen for `log:new` events. Events can target a room `logs:<workspaceId>` or broadcast to `logs:all`.

## Running locally

1. Install dependencies: `npm install`
2. Start socket server: `npm run dev:socket` (listens on `:9150` by default)
3. Emit a test log: `curl -X POST http://localhost:9150/emit-log -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{"id":"t1","ts":1690000000000,"method":"GET","path":"/api/test","statusCode":200}'`

## Integration

-   Client wrapper: `services/socketClient.ts` provides a simple API: `connect(token?)`, `on(event, handler)`, `emit(event, payload)`, `join(room)`, `disconnect()`.
-   App wires `socketClient.on('log:new', ...)` to append logs to the UI if `FEATURES.LOG_VIEWER()` is enabled.

## Security & Scaling

-   If `SOCKET_AUTH_TOKEN` is set in the env, the server requires the same token on handshake (query param or `auth.token` for socket.io clients).
-   For multi-instance deployments, use a socket.io adapter such as `socket.io-redis` to broadcast events between instances.

## Configuration

The socket server exposes several environment variables to control behavior and hardening. These are intended primarily for development and local test servers, but can be tuned for restricted production-like environments if needed:

-   **SOCKET_RATE_LIMIT** — Maximum messages allowed _per socket_ during a rate window. Default: `5`.
-   **SOCKET_RATE_WINDOW_MS** — Length of the rate-limit window in milliseconds. Default: `5000` (5 seconds).
-   **SOCKET_ALLOWED_ORIGINS** — Comma-separated list of allowed origins for CORS (e.g. `https://app.example.com,https://ci.example.com`). If set, only requests from these origins are accepted; in production, leaving this empty will block cross-origin requests by default.
-   **SOCKET_SERVER_QUIET** — Set to `1` or `true` to suppress console logs from the socket server (useful in CI). Default: `false`.

These settings help protect the lightweight socket server from noisy or malformed clients and make it safer to run in CI or shared development environments.

## Tests

-   Unit test: `test/socketClient.test.ts` validates that a client receives `log:new` when `POST /emit-log` is called.
-   E2E: `test/e2e/socket-log-stream.spec.ts` verifies the browser UI shows a log emitted by the socket server.
